You, with like an affordable amount of spend on tokens, you can do what a hundred percent incredibly great engineering team would do. As a startup, and that's just totally possible. It's like not in this set of options for startup, and that is so. So I think what you can take on the level of ambition, you can have the speed, you can move the amount of stuff you can do at once. Uh, it's just totally different. And does that change the shape of the problems you feel like you're assigning at the end of the class for people to attack?
You know, at the end of that quarter, if you're teaching again, I think assigning problems to attack ever works because if you like, if I can think of a problem, if I can think of like a really great startup idea, uh, it's obvious enough to me. Uh, then it's probably obvious to a lot of people. When we started OpenAI, we were we were like the, uh, you know, one of maybe generously speaking for AI efforts in the world, right?
And you want to find something like that, and I'm sure that there exists something today that just wasn't possible at all pre, like automated coding era. Uh, that is totally not obvious. That will be, you know, uh, multi trillion dollar markets, and only four companies working on right now. But I don't know what that is. It's much more likely you'll know what that is than I know what that is. I just, you know, my brain is like taking over OpenAI. Um, but you know, the kind of ideas someone can assign you to work on is probably not what you want. Yup. Um. Okay. So that that's fair. Um. But I think it would be helpful since this is a systems class to maybe uh reason about a particular problem that you have to reason through so that they can apply the shape of the needs to break down from a systems perspective that problem to solutions to their own problem. Um. And and a concept that uh you started to tease in the class, you know, back in twenty fourteen and then clearly talked about publicly over the years is um scale. Right. Scale is its own beast. It's it's you know quantity. It's its own quality. What what scale as a concept is something. It's something you've um empirically investigated in all kinds of ways over the last ten years. So um could you help on help us first unpack like what you mean by scale now ten years later?
How would you reconstruct that as a systems design attribute to apply what is it as as a tool?
Um can can we start there?
Yes. Uh. So I don't know why the following observation is true. I offer no theory that I find satisfying to explain it, and that makes me a little bit nervous to suggest you follow it. But I'm going to anyway because empirically it does seem to be true, which is all of the most interesting things I have observed in my career in watching other uh things happen. All of the most interesting ones uh have had something to do with emergent properties of scale or scale continuing to provide returns far beyond what the consensus thinks will work. And this obviously happens with like scaling large for AI models. Um. But this happens with uh you know getting more smart people together to think about a problem. This and and researching um this happens with uh companies and this sort of economy of scale you can get all the all these different ways. I really learned this at Y Combinator when uh it became clear to me that everybody was saying oh Y Combinator oughtn't to be a get-rich-quick, which are some less companies per batch, you know, the best times at Y Combinator were when it was like ten companies per batch, and a lot of like very smart people were saying this, and and it was like tempting. It would have been like much less work, and the theory was that you know the best companies are always kind of obvious and then you fund the rest, and it's not as helpful. Um. But a huge part of the magic of what made YC work were uh was this sort of the network effects inside of the batch, and that was an emergent property of scale that just hadn't been discovered before. No one had tried to fund startups at scale in the same way, and and no one had ever happened upon this observation when you do that. Um. There's there's something important that happens that just didn't exist at all at the one hundred one hundredth scale. There's a bunch of other examples like this. Uh. I and I'll skip them in the interest of time, but I I would say again I offer no explanation for why, but empirically speaking, when you find a time that you can push on, you can push something to scale, people have not tried before, and it's already working in some interesting way atYou know, when we were like, we're really gonna scale AI models. Um, all of the like geniuses in the field, most of them were, all this isn't really working. You know, that's that's purely a scientific result. It's not interesting that it gets better. It scales, but shown that like, scaling it. I mentioned the YC example. Um, I've seen a lot of startup founders where they're like, well, you know, there might be something interesting happening if I scale this up, but yeah, I'm a little worried about it for a number of different reasons. And again, looking back at like a huge dataset of people that have scaled their companies and all these different ways, there's almost always interesting stuff there. So I think directionally, that's like an interesting thing to push on and severely explore. Um, on the systems design part of that, uh, I think one reason people don't do it as much is stuff breaks uh at an accelerating rate in an unpredictable way as you scale it. And if you are gonna really scale something, um, it's always like a little bit broken. There are always like very smart people who say, "Why you shouldn't do this." You know, don't get too ambitious, don't get too big. Let's try the smaller. And so breaking that down, the systems problem. I used the thing of when we were like scaling up AI models, there was technically we do this, all this seems crazy. Like, no one ever thought about trying to do a hundred thousand, two hundred thousand GPU's, and that was gonna require stacks of engineering talent. Um, there was the capital requirements, and what was going to take to do this, like, how is there ever gonna be a business?
How do you think about taking this risk?
Uh, there was the sort of like cultural stuff for researchers saying, "Well, if we're gonna get all this compute, why do we put it all into this one project when we're gonna learn something?
Why have to buy it for all these all these products?
" And this also happens in kind of every area. I've looked at almost every area for scale and breaking it down into the sort of each difficult area or each reason not to do and trying to address them one at a time. Yeah, that's really important. Um, I'm gonna push on that a little bit because there's very few people able to sort of repeatedly scale new products and systems the way the open AI team has over the years. But it seems like one of the issues is there are all these prior conditioning, sort of mental model expectations humans have, and you said things break, and one of things it seems often breaks. That's hard. The hardest to refactor is is human. The human side of the system design, wherever the human implementers or there's uh human participants in that. And so whatever you learn about humans that scale, like organizing humans that scale to participate in a system that may not be uh like just a redo of some past system that they they get naive on at a priority on first blush. Um, I think like clear a clear goal, a clear plan to get there, uh, and like a clear answer to the way that you're gonna get there, kind of how you're gonna make decisions along the way. That's that's very important. So, um, you know, if we go back to the example when we decided to scale up models, there were a lot of people who were like, "This isn't really gonna work. It's gonna have these problems. It's also not, you know, we need a more versatile portfolio." But once we say, "No, we're gonna make a bet on scaling deep learning," like that sort of thing, if we're wrong, we'll fail, but we're gonna do that. Here's why we're gonna do that. Here's what we believe about what the state of the world can be like if we get there. Uh, that's very powerful. And then for whatever reason, um, we did not evolve to be good at thinking about exponentials. People have a hard time imagining that scaling models are gonna continue exponentially, that revenue will grow exponentially, that organization can take on exponential complexity. And in my experience, it takes a lot of time to really reason through first principles with people about why why that can happen. Can we take two examples to walk through that?
The first being ChatGPT and the second being Codex. You know, both of these have transformed. Can I can I go here on my project?
Yeah, okay. Um, so let let me put in a frame and you can tell us both the assumptions and then we can hopefully reason through example what happened. In the case of ChatGPT, you know, for a long time in scaling models, a big mental block that seemed to be holding this space is, what are theseYou compare and contrast the systems you guys used to discover those use cases, ship them, scale them, monetize them, any any science, learnings from those systems. So we had GPT three and we needed to make money because we wanted to go scale up to you know billion and multi billion dollar computers. And we had GPT three and it was kind of interesting. It was a cool demo, but we couldn't figure out a product to build on it. And we had been thinking, thinking, we just couldn't do it. We had tried a few things, they they hadn't worked. And so we knew the models were getting better, but we also wanted to like start revenue in sooner. And we said, well, since we can't figure out what product to build, we're just gonna put this into an API. And we're gonna hope that somebody else figure out a product to build. And so we launched in like I don't know, summer of 2020, the GPT three API. And initially, it kind of got no traction at all. And then about a month later, randomly as far as we can tell, it went viral on Twitter on the same day a few different developers kind of found, got to do something cool, posted it, other people started trying. And and then like a lot of people started trying the API. But it was shockingly bad. If you go back and use GPT three or three point five, you will be astonished how bad the models were then relative to the amount of excitement they generated at the time. So people tried all these things, and really the only business that people got to work in a significant way with GPT three was copyright. And that was like not that great and not that exciting, and we were kind of like you know just kind of waiting for a better model. But although that was the only business that was working, developers had figured out how to like put in a prompt and get and be able to chat with it. And we saw this a lot. Like more people were using, they couldn't get the API to work for their business, but they were using the API to just chat. We said, well, we can build a good chatbot. People clearly want that. And we had a new model. We actually had GPT four done. We had a new model we were ready to release between three point five. And we had figured out a new kind of push training where we can get the models to do like good job with instruction following, so it can easily chat with. And we said, well, you know, the API is not working great. Maybe it's like ten or twenty million dollar run rate business, but there is this thing that people love. And under the YC principle of see what you use a lot and do that, we said, well, we'll build a chatbot on it. And we put that out, and we still didn't think it was gonna do that well. There was it was really meant as like a research demo to convince other people that they should build chat like products and pay for the API. But that went like crazy viral. And another thing I learned from YC is when something really starts growing and it's not very good, you have like a guarantee hit on your hands. And so we had like five days where the traffic would shoot up, fall off, and everybody be like, well, that was just a high cycle. But the next day, it would get to a higher peak, fall off again, and then the people say that's a high cycle. By the fourth or fifth day, I was like, I know how this works. I know what's gonna happen. We have the potential here at a killer product. And we knew we could make it much better. We knew we could. We knew we had GPT four. We knew we could keep scaling. But by that fifth day, we got everybody together and said, this is an emergency. This is a good kind of emergency, but we have to build a company and a product all at once. We then had like two months of crazy scaling. And then we said, you know, we have to figure out a business model later. For now, we're just gonna charge people so that we don't like run out of compute bills. But that's obviously not the long term answer. That also turned out just to work. And that was the story of ChatGPT. And then there was so much utility that people just had not gotten over the innovation and defined that that worked really well. And then Codex, actually the plan before ChatGPT was that we were gonna go all in on code. We knew these models could write code. We knew that they could be really, and we knew that would be like a valuable area. But then we had this incredibly exciting thing happen. But our kind of internal belief at the time was that coding was how theseThe class we've talked about the capability pipeline is starting to is starting to become somewhat more legible standard across different research groups. You got pre-training, mid-training, post-training. You got the model supervised feedback loop. Is do you think that's roughly like the shape of the pipeline that a lot of codex, you know, goes through?
And that will basically stay stable now and consistent, or are we gonna go through a major rewrite of that pipeline?
I think that is definitely the current pipeline. I expect we will go through a major rewrite. I don't know when or how, or exactly how, but it is a little odd to me that it's so happens as a pipeline and doesn't quite feel like the optimal solution. What would be optimal solution in your head?
I think that's the research problem for AI today. I think we're at a point where we set this goal that by September of this year, we will use five hundred thousand eight hundred equivalent GPUs, like a lot of computing power, as an AI research intern. And by March of twenty twenty eight, that we will have a full end end very talented researcher like figuring out complete architectures. So I think we are gonna get like with the current pipeline and current architectures. I think we're gonna get over the line of when AI can do incredible, incredible work. You know, one of the things that you just described there is you you we've been talking a lot in the class about systems framework and analogies to make concepts from one domain legible to other people who may not have all the context in another. And sometimes because of the translation problem, you know, using analogies not helpful because the errors compound. You know, right there is you know our goal is to try to use it as an AI intern, which obviously is very useful metaphor within the context of you know certain analogies a class that understands how these pipelines work and so on. And then as as you scale, actually that metaphor globally, people might not have all that context. Go start analyzing these models in ways that they shouldn't be. Like how should we think about the limits of of that of of what are the limits to scale of um what are the product analogies the research analogies you find most useful within the valley and which one of the one have you found about found about the limits of those analogies scaling and now how do you navigate between those two problems?
I I've been very interested in studying how, but I I think what's happening is we we're in the process of creating utility. This doesn't happen very often. You know, electricity is utility, internet is utility. There water I guess there's not a lot of these, and so there are not a lot of examples that we can study for good metaphors or learnings about how to explain this to the world. But I was recently looking at what happened when electricity became a utility, and it's a good analogy for many reasons. It's imperfect, of course, too, but the electricity company is at least the ones I could find information about. They didn't talk about selling electricity because no one knew what that was or why they wanted. It sounds like very scary. It's this thing that's like gonna come into your house and kill you. It's like recently and you you know it feels sort of like very different than the world before. Ah, and maybe they tried to sell electricity or market electricity first. I don't know, but in case that didn't work, and what they started marketing selling to people was light nights. You know, we are gonna what you are getting from us is not electricity, it's light night. By the way, you can use the same thing, let's do light for all these other things. But people are like, well, why would I want that?
And I'm like, well, you know, it'll wash your clothes for you someday. And no one will want that. That's too far a jump for me, right?
Um, so I don't know what our analogy for this should be. Um, but I suspect that even if even if we're totally right and intelligence is gonna become this utility, that every company, every customer, every government just needs access to and is gonna use in all sorts of incredible ways, and you will have like an open eye token subscription that you will plug into everything and use to access everything and you have running for you all the time doing amazing stuff. I kind of don't think at least right now the right way for us to analogize that is selling intelligence because people are just like somehow not resonating. I don't know what our equivalent of selling light night is going to be, but I think if we're gonna become a utility, we need to find a way to explain to the world what it means to have this like intelligent pipe that you can just do whatever you like. So um one question that has emerged an emergent property of this class of of having diversity ofできるようにする。
まず、
I think world models are clearly important, and we'll need that for things like robotics. But betting against elements at this point feels quite misguided to me. Is it getting annoying to be the idol, you so guy?
No. I mean, there are these like Twitter trolls that you know for years of just being like, it's not gonna work, it's not gonna work. This is so dumb, like you know, this is fraud. This company is gonna fail. This research approach is gonna fail. And I used to get more bothered by them, but I don't even like feel the idol. You so at this point, it's like you were just like, you're still going on about it. Like the data is quite strong on our side. And I don't mean be that fun. This idol, you so, and also the fact that you're like still saying we're wrong doesn't really bother me. I think there's that kind of move on. There's that saying that like insanity is doing the same thing over and over again with present data that does not work. You're gonna be interpreting that, and insanity. It's it's a form of insanity, I think. I I think there's something that happens, which is if you make your identity about a particular thing is going to work or not work, and you associate yourself with that belief, and then the science or the empirical results disprove you, and you're like too numb on your identity, you can't let it go, you can't see the truth. Yeah. And I think this is like important reminder in both directions. Yeah. How do you see education?
Um, it clearly has to super adapt, and I am worried. I I thought by now it would have. Um, the the I think if we continue to teach and evaluate students as if we were in a pre AI world, um, it's not gonna work, and it is gonna lead to like atrophy of learning how to think or whatever. And I thought that was gonna be obvious enough that I wasn't that worried. You know, when ChatGPT launched, I was like, yeah, we're gonna have one year of like students like cheating and not learning much, and then the education system is just gonna redesign itself and there's and we're gonna teach people so much better. You know, people are going to really get projects where they have to they have to use AI to be able to do it, but they still have to like stretch their brain more and think more and figure out new things to do. And honestly, I struggle to point to any significant systemic change that I've seen in the education system at large in the three and a half years since ChatGPT launched, and that was a predictioner for me. I thought I thought that would happen, so I have no doubt that we can uh like we've done with every other technology before redesign how education works so that you still have to learn how to think. And there will be some things like I I I am a person who thinks by writing, and I write a lot of stuff that I never show anyone else, but it's still important to me to figure something out and be grateful that I learned to write. People say the same thing about programming. Um, so there will be some things that we teach people to do that machines can do better. Just because it's helpful to teach them the better skill of thinking and learning, and that makes sense. But there are a lot of other things where we should just totally teach, totally change how we teach or how we learn or how we evaluate. And if we don't do that, I think there will be like significant atrophy in people's critical thinking skills. A question is what was your favorite class, and what would you wish you'd taken when you were at Stanford?
Does Stanford still do internships?
I did like all the I did like three internships a quarter my freshman year, like and I loved all of them. They were all super different. Uh, I but looking back, the fact that I was able to get such a broad exposure to stuff and have like a very shallow understanding of lots of different fields was an incredible thing. If it had not been for that, I just would have taken like CS and physics classes, which still would have been great. But um, I I think more about the stuff the classes I took that were like totally random and unrelated to what I do now, but in some important way gave me perspective. And I do I think I would have like learned to program no matter what. Uh, so I I didn't think that at the time. I was like kind of like you know, it's this stuff is all cool, but it's mostly gonna be about like learning CS. Um, I only did two years of school, uh, so there was a lot that I wanted to take that I didn't get to. Um, but that's kind of disappointing. AI don't think this is like widely believed, and I think if this were widely believed, there would be like significantly more reverberations than happening through society right now. Maybe I don't understand the question. Maybe this is the harder bit: that if AI progress continues on the exponential, it's on for another three and a half years and trajectory. Even for another three and a half years on that same trajectory, the world, the potential, the way that society, what society is capable of, are just completely different. Well, let me try to prompt you with more things to open on that one. You have, if we treated you as a model, like a frontier model, and you have some inherent capabilities, and we're going to try to list capabilities that people don't know about for the next few minutes. One of them is that you've been pushing now on, you've been continuously around on open AI as well as external feedback through the world on what doesn't work and what works and doesn't work. So now, if we're going to treat you as a prediction engine for a sec, the prompt is: What are the three most likely forks of the universe you see over the next ten years?
And what is your what is your probability assessment on each of those?
Does that make sense?
One that feels very important is like how much is this technology going to be very widely democratized versus how much is it going to sit in a few companies. I think a world there are all of these reasons why you could imagine the default is that this gets concentrated to a few companies and they become like, you know, significant fraction of the wealth on earth. That would obviously be terrible, and we work super hard to push against that. But I think that's going to require like the will of the world to to really avoid because there is a sort of trajectory there. And I think part of the reason that we need to push to this kind of utility model of the world is that a it's quite unstable and quite bad, almost quite unfair if a few companies have all this, but b I think it's a realignment failure and a very fragile world. And the best way to get to a world where one represents like everybody winning and everybody's value is being represented, everybody having agency, is to just push this technology out into the world. But there will be a very strong argument against that around sort of safety and stability. And I think that will be a big fork, and it's very important. And I encourage all of you in your careers to push hard that this is technology. It can bring us an incredible sci-fi future. Life can be unbelievably much better. We are going to incur some risk to get there, but the risk of keeping it concentrated in a handful of companies, even though we would want to beat these companies, is not something we should tolerate. So I think that will be a big fork. In terms of probability, I think it's the world should have such interest in it happening this way that I think it's like 80% we end up on the democratic path, but there will be a very strong safety message, and you know there will be a lot of power-seeking people who want to concentrate the power. And one of the problems of forecasting this, or that you have, and we all have as humans, is once you make that forecast, you have agency to affect the forecast, right?
The forecast. Well, I mean, we're clear. We're going to use agency for like this is what we believe, and we think that you know we're going to do everything we can to push it in this direction. We just we see the forces in the other direction. Maybe a related fork. There's a lot of talk about like future economic models, and we're going to do universal basic income, or we're going to have everybody gets like all the slices of every company, like we're going to is it capitalism and change to like full on communism?
There's like a lot of talk about this. One thing that I think is not talked about much is how specifically how distributed compute. So maybe a lot of the economy can work in a way that's going to work. And I've actually I've become much less of an short-term jobster. I've always been optimistic, we find new things to do, but this may not need to be as disruptive as originally thought in the short term. But we are seeing compute shortages now. I can imagine them getting much worse, and I can imagine compute being like the most important utility that people need. So if the price of compute from a supply and demand perspective gets way too high, then I think there will be a very interesting fork about what it means to be distributed compute. So if you're doing interesting things there, you said on the economic side, we might have need universal basic income. Everybody wants to be shares. You know one of the speakers in this class is Nicolai Tangena way for the government to redistribute income from taxpayers. So are these solutions that actually need to be novel, or just re-implemented for this era?
How do you think about the novelty of those solutions?
Where we often, you know, in second value, have a tendency to be like, reinvent, you know, old things from first principles. And so should we just look to existing systems?
And I am, I don't think that these things require deeply new ideas. Although I will say, I am much more excited about people having some sort of ownership stake than a fixed monthly cash dividend, right?
And I, I found it like a big universal theme comes to the a while ago. I've also watched what happens when people like invest in startups, and I know which model I think like it seems like all together. So what I would love to see is as leverage in the world shifts from labor to capital, which I think is going to keep happening, that we find a way to have something like a citizens' wealth fund in the country and the world eventually, where you like, you basically own a slice of capital, you own a slice of these companies. And then on the second fork there on computer bottlenecks, you said at some point when computer prices get out of whack between January and this year, my my current understanding is based on data we've seen that H100 prices and Blackwell prices the spread between long term reservations and spot is like five x. I don't know if it's that high anymore. I think it got a little better, but yeah, it's high. Or if you can even find H100s, because they're pretty much all gone for this year. Does that sound right?
No argument. There's a gigantic computer shortage. So that's a good example of an of a system problem right now that's live. At least to some folks, it feels like COVID. You know, before the computer era, like all the toilet papers gone. Yeah. Why are people not freaking out about this?
Well, I think people assume we will make big improvements on the hardware we have. I also think there is a tsunami of hardware coming, but maybe the demand tsunami is even bigger. And I think people should be freaking out somewhat. And and would you say it's fair?
Like how long are we going to exist in a computer shortage?
At least, you know, based on current data, you have. I think like other, you you can't talk really about like worldwide demand for electricity without talking about the price. Like it's there's extremely different demand about how much energy people use in the world if the price comes down by a factor of ten or goes up by a factor of ten. And I think AI is like that too. Uh, the if we can make models sufficiently smart and it's sufficiently low cost, I think demand is like kind of uncapped. And so in some sense, as long as we can continue to make progress on this, there will be shortage forever, and things will be a bit among above what the price we think we think the price should be, even though people are getting better, smarter, more able, and intelligence, just because you can use like if we make really great personal agents, and you can have 10 of them running and working through all the time or a hundred, you know, you want a hundred, I think. It's a lot of inference. Without a computer. Awesome. With that, I'm going to give you the swag for the class, which is. Thank you for coming. Thank you.